In this paper, we have introduced a calculus to compute commutating operations on
intersections of regular languages that we call \Calculus{}. We have evaluated
it on \NrBenchmarks{} Parikh automata intersection problems generated by the
\OstrichPlus{} string solver \cite{ostrich-plus} solving the PyEx benchmark
suite \cite{pyex} using our Parikh automata solver \Catra{}.

Within \Catra{}, \Calculus{} shows astonishing performance in terms of
solve-time compared to the baseline approach laid out in
\cite{generate-parikh-image} when implemented on the same underlying automated
theorem prover (\Princess{}, \cite{princess}). It is also competitive with the
\Nuxmv{} model checker \cite{nuxmv}, outperforming it on unsatisfiable instances
and generally outperforming it for timeouts under 30 seconds with its advantage
increasing drastically for even shorter timeouts. 30 seconds would generally be
considered a long timeout for our intended use as supporting infrastructure to a
string constraint solver.

Future investigations involve two tracks. The first one is integration into
existing string solvers (wich \Ostrich{} being a particularly promising
candidate due to its shared use of \Princess{}), and further adaptation to that
use case. Closer inspection of the instances where we currently time out should
be useful to further improve our heuristics.

The second track for future improvements is the extension into other problem
domains, including other logics, model checking problems, as well as to more
powerful automata such as transducers. In principle, we can already express
stronger constraints than Parikh automata due to our use of an automated theorem
prover which allows rich constraints on counter variables.